[Dataset hub] more than storage: streaming, editing, connectors (#2052)
huggingface/hub-docs: docs/hub/datasets-streaming.md

# Streaming datasets

## Integrated libraries

If a dataset on the Hub is tied to a [supported library](./datasets-libraries) that allows streaming from Hugging Face, streaming the dataset can be done in just a few lines. For information on accessing the dataset, you can click on the "Use this dataset" button on the dataset page to see how to do so. For example, [`samsum`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/Samsung/samsum?library=datasets) shows how to do so with 🤗 Datasets below.

<div class="flex justify-center">
<img class="block dark:hidden" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/hub/datasets-usage.png"/>
<img class="hidden dark:block" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/hub/datasets-usage-dark.png"/>

> </div>

Author: maybe we should have a toggle or something to show the Streaming code in addition to the Download code ? wdyt @cfahlgren1 ?

<div class="flex justify-center">
<img class="block dark:hidden" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/hub/datasets-usage-modal.png"/>
<img class="hidden dark:block" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/hub/datasets-usage-modal-dark.png"/>
</div>

## Using the Hugging Face Client Library

You can use the [`huggingface_hub`](/docs/huggingface_hub) library to create, delete, and access files from repositories. For example, to stream the `allenai/c4` dataset in python, run

```python
from huggingface_hub import HfFileSystem

fs = HfFileSystem()

repo_id = "allenai/c4"
path_in_repo = "en/c4-train.00000-of-01024.json.gz"

# Stream the file
with fs.open(f"datasets/{repo_id}/{path_in_repo}", "r", compression="gzip") as f:
    print(f.readline())  # read only the first line

>     # {"text":"Beginners BBQ Class Taking Place in Missoula!...}

Reviewer: like a `from huggingface_hub import fs` you mean?

>     # {"text":"Beginners BBQ Class Taking Place in Missoula!...}

Reviewer 2: yes, one of those two could be very nice

`from huggingface_hub import hffs` maybe if we go w/ @Wauplin proposition

"act","prompt"
"An Ethereum Developer","Imagine you are an experienced Ethereum developer tasked with creating...
"SEO Prompt","Using WebPilot, create an outline for an article that will be 2,000 words on the ...
"Linux Terminal","I want you to act as a linux terminal. I will type commands and you will repl...
"English Translator and Improver","I want you to act as an English translator, spelling correct...
```

Use range requests to access a specific portion of a file:

```bash
>>> curl -r 40-88 -L https://huggingface.co/datasets/fka/awesome-chatgpt-prompts/resolve/main/prompts.csv
Imagine you are an experienced Ethereum developer
```

Stream from private repositories using an [access token](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/security-tokens):

```bash
>>> export HF_TOKEN=hf_xxx
>>> curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $HF_TOKEN" -L https://huggingface.co/...
```

## Streaming Parquet

Parquet is a great format for AI datasets. It offers good compression, a columnar structure for efficient processing and projections, and multi-level metadata for fast filtering, and is suitable for datasets of all sizes.

> Parquet files are divided in row groups that are often around 100MB each. This lets data loaders and data processing frameworks stream data progressively, iterating on row groups.

Reviewer 2: we do need a doc page about CDC Parquet btw!! cc @kszucs too

### Stream Row Groups

Use PyArrow to stream row groups from Parquet files on Hugging Face:

```python
import pyarrow.parquet as pq

repo_id = "HuggingFaceFW/finewiki"
path_in_repo = "data/enwiki/000_00000.parquet"

# Stream the Parquet file row group per row group
with pq.ParquetFile(f"hf://datasets/{repo_id}/{path_in_repo}") as pf:
    for row_group_idx in range(pf.num_row_groups):
        row_group_table = pf.read_row_group(row_group_idx)
        df = row_group_table.to_pandas()
```

> ![TIP]
> PyArrow supports `hf://` paths out-of-the-box and uses `HfFileSystem` automatically

Find more information in the [PyArrow documentation](./datasets-pyarrow).

### Efficient random access

> Row groups are further divied into columns, and columns into pages. Pages are often around 1MB and are the smallest unit of data in Parquet, since this is where compression is applied. Accessing pages enables loading specific rows without having to load a full row group, and is possible if the Parquet file has a page index. However not every Parquet frameworks supports reading at the page level. PyArrow doesn't for example, but the `parquet` crate in Rust does:

Reviewer 2: add a good visual of Parquet file format, and btw we should have a /docs/hub/parquet page probably...

> Row groups are further divied into columns, and columns into pages. Pages are often around 1MB and are the smallest unit of data in Parquet, since this is where compression is applied. Accessing pages enables loading specific rows without having to load a full row group, and is possible if the Parquet file has a page index. However not every Parquet frameworks supports reading at the page level. PyArrow doesn't for example, but the `parquet` crate in Rust does:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Row groups are further divided into columns, and columns into pages. Pages are often around 1MB and are the smallest unit of data in Parquet, since this is where compression is applied. Accessing pages enables loading specific rows without having to load a full row group, and is possible if the Parquet file has a page index. However not every Parquet frameworks support reading at the page level. PyArrow doesn't for example, but the `parquet` crate in Rust does:
```

# Streaming datasets

## Integrated libraries

> If a dataset on the Hub is tied to a [supported library](./datasets-libraries) that allows streaming from Hugging Face, streaming the dataset can be done in just a few lines. For information on accessing the dataset, you can click on the "Use this dataset" button on the dataset page to see how to do so. For example, [`knkarthick/samsum`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/knkarthick/samsum?library=datasets) shows how to do so with `datasets` below.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If a dataset on the Hub is compatible with a [supported library](./datasets-libraries) that allows streaming from Hugging Face, streaming the dataset can be done in just a few lines. For information on accessing the dataset, you can click on the "Use this dataset" button on the dataset page to see how to do so. For example, [`knkarthick/samsum`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/knkarthick/samsum?library=datasets) shows how to do so with `datasets` below.
```

<div class="flex justify-center">
<img class="block dark:hidden" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/hub/datasets-usage.png"/>
<img class="hidden dark:block" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/hub/datasets-usage-dark.png"/>
</div>

<div class="flex justify-center">
<img class="block dark:hidden" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/hub/datasets-usage-modal.png"/>
<img class="hidden dark:block" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/hub/datasets-usage-modal-dark.png"/>
</div>

## Using the Hugging Face Client Library

You can use the [`huggingface_hub`](/docs/huggingface_hub) library to create, delete, and access files from repositories. For example, to stream the `allenai/c4` dataset in Python, simply install the library (we recommend using the latest version) and run the following code.

```bash

> pip install -U huggingface_hub

Reviewer 4: The code fence is broken here.
